---
title: "Open Source Applications Foudation"
date: 2002-10-21T00:00:00
permalink: https://joi.ito.com/jp/archives/2002/10/21/002598.html
language: jp
categories: []
author: Joichi Ito
source_path: /jp/archives/2002/10/21/002598.html
extracted: 2025-12-25
---

すごい！open source, P2P, email, IM, calendar...　すごいチームで完全なOpen Sourceのpersonal information management systemのプラットフォーム。財団法人。最初のお金はLotusのMitch Kapor。メンバーにはAndy Hertzfeldもいる。ブロッグにもとっても関係がある。昨日ダンに教えてまらったんだけどかれのスクープ記事の後にブロッグするって約束しました。ＭＳも危機を感じるでしょう。彼らの財団は[Open Source Applications Foudation](http://www.osafoundation.org/)。  
> Dan Gillmor
>
>   
> Posted on Sun, Oct. 20, 2002   
> [Software idea may be just crazy enough to work](http://www.siliconvalley.com/mld/siliconvalley/4327025.htm)  
> By Dan Gillmor  
> Mercury News Technology Columnist

*this is an excerpt from the middle*

If the software lives up to the developers' plans, it will have wide appeal. It should be highly adaptable to personal tastes, with robust collaborative features. I'm especially hopeful about a feature to build in strong encryption in a way that lets users protect their privacy without having to think about it.

The Chandler architecture builds on other open-source projects. These include Python, a development language and environment that's gaining more and more fans among programmers, and Jabber, a communications infrastructure that started life as an instant-messaging alternative but has evolved into a robust platform of its own.

One of the Chandler developers, Andy Hertzfeld, is volunteering his services. Hertzfeld is well-known in the software community, partly for his key role in creating Apple's original Macintosh and Mac operating system. An open-source company he co-founded a few years ago, Eazel, died during the Internet bubble's immediate aftermath.

``I hope we make a great application that I love to use myself, and that eventually millions of people will enjoy using,'' he says. ``Hopefully, we'll be able to make e-mail a lot more secure, without encumbering the user with technical detail. We can make accessing and managing information of all kinds more convenient if we're lucky. And we'll be helping to pave the way for free software to displace proprietary operating systems at the center of the commercial software industry.''