---
title: "U.S. Military's GPS Reliance Makes A Cheap, Easy Target"
date: 2002-10-05T00:00:00
permalink: https://joi.ito.com/jp/archives/2002/10/05/002579.html
language: jp
categories: []
author: Joichi Ito
source_path: /jp/archives/2002/10/05/002579.html
extracted: 2025-12-25
---

前マイケルから聞いていたけど、GPSは簡単にジャミング出来るらしい。かなり軍はGPSに頼っている部分もあって、結構問題になっているみたい。*From David Farber's IP*
> Wall Street Journal
>
> U.S. Military's GPS Reliance Makes A Cheap, Easy TargetIn recent months, the Pentagon has stepped up orders for
> precision-guided bombs that use GPS technology. The Pentagon could
> use such bombs in an invasion of Iraq to target Iraqi military
> installations with pinpoint accuracy. However, these precision-guided
> bombs may be vulnerable to GPS jammers. At the Paris Air Show in
> 1999, a Russian company called Aviaconversia demonstrated a 4-watt
> GPS jammer. The jammer weighed about 19 pounds and was capable of
> denying GPS reception for more than 100 miles. Many such jammers are
> available through the Internet for as little as $39.9. That has
> caught the attention of military officials and politicians alike. "We
> believe Saddam Hussein has GPS-jamming capability and that he will
> use it," said Rep. Joseph Pitts, the co-chairman of the Electronic
> Warfare Working Group. The members of this group include 25
> congressmen who have been studying GPS vulnerability, among other
> issues. "While we do not know the extent of our vulnerability, there
> is evidence to suggest that GPS jamming can significantly inhibit
> precision targeting," Mr. Pitts added. While jammers can interrupt
> the commercial signal, the military signal is configured in such a
> way so as to make it difficult to interrupt. But the problem is that
> the military uses the commercial signal to track the military signal.
> Some research is on to come up with a technology that allows direct
> access of the military signal by aircrafts. Currently, increasing the
> signal power is the only solution. Such efforts are under way and the
> Air Force is planning three stages of upgraded satellites over the
> next 10 to 15 years.