---
title: "24/7 Video Summitに注目"
date: 2007-11-06T00:00:00
permalink: https://joi.ito.com/jp/archives/2007/11/06/004711.html
language: jp
categories: []
author: Joichi Ito
source_path: /jp/archives/2007/11/06/004711.html
extracted: 2025-12-25
---

24/7 Video Summitには、最近開かれたどのカンファレンスよりも多くの友人たちが参加する。盛り上がること間違いなしだ。つまらない人間になりたくなかったら、参加した方がいいよ。

> [24/7: A DIY VIDEO SUMMIT](http://www.video24-7.org)
>
> February 8-10, 2008 School of Cinematic Arts, University of Southern California
>
> [Howard says] I'm thrilled to moderate a session on Feb 9 that will include Yochai Benkler, John Seely Brown, Joi Ito, Henry Jenkins, and Lawrence Lessig. I don't think this particular group has ever been on stage together.
>
> Conference web site: <http://www.video24-7.org>   
> Blog: <http://diy.video24-7.org/>
>
> Spaces are limited for attendance at the academic panels and the workshops. The video screenings are free and open to the public.
>
> 24/7: A DIY Video Summit will bring together the many communities that have evolved around do-it-yourself (DIY) video:artists, audiences, technology providers, academics, policy makers and industry executives. The aim is to discover common ground, and to chart the path to a future in which grassroots and mainstream, amateur and professional, artist and audience can all benefit as the medium continues to evolve.
>
> This three-day summit features:
>
> SCREENINGS OF DIY VIDEO
>
> On February 8 and 9, there will be screenings of DIY video that are  
> open to the public. These will feature curated programs on design video, activist documentary, youth media, machinima, music video, political remix and video blogging. The video program will culminate in an evening program and reception on February 9 that will draw from all of these video genres.
>
> ACADEMIC PROGRAM   
> Registered attendees will have access to the academic program on February 8 and 9 that features panels on The State of Research, The State of the Art, DIY Media: The Intellectual Property Dilemma andDIY Tools and Platforms. Featured speakers include Yochai Benkler,  
> John Seely Brown, Joi Ito, Henry Jenkins, Lawrence Lessig, and Howard   
> Rheingold.
>
> WORKSHOPS AND BIRDS-OF-A-FEATHER MEETINGS
>
> On February 10, the day will be devoted to practical and hands-onworkshops for registered attendees on topics such as intellectual property, media creation, distribution and new-media design tools.   
> Attendees will also have the option of organizing their own birds-of-a-feather meetings to connect with other attendees.